# recogito-network
This is a pipeline for marking up text in Recogito and creating network graphs with that information in Kumu. It is designed for the undergraduate humanities or social sciences classroom. \
Recogito is a web-based system that allows the user to upload a text and mark it up with a clean graphic user interface, tagging persons, places, and events, as well as the relationships among them. The data thus created can be downloaded in a number of formats. Recogito also has a built-in map visualization for the places tagged. It does not, however, have a built-in network analysis tool.\
Kumu is a web-based network analysis tool. While it is not as flexible or sophisticated as Gephi or Cytoscape, it has the virtues of not requiring a software download and having a very short learning curve.\
There has not hitherto been a publicly-available way to take the relationships tagged in Recogito and create network graphs from them. That is what this pipeline is designed to accomplish. It does this by having users export the marked-up text from Recogito as TEI XML, transform it with a series of XQuery scripts to create CSV files, copy those files into Excel spreadsheets, and upload them to Kumu to create a network graph. By experimenting with Kumu, students can quickly learn fundamental terminology and concepts of network analysis and use those to explore the text they marked up in new ways.\
An in-depth coding class, including a Digital Humanities coding class, might not use either of these systems, preferring to get under the hood. However, for an Intro to Digital Humanities class that will be covering a series of tools and methodologies, or for a Humanities or Social Sciences class that just wants to import a digital unit, this pipeline has the virtues of using relatively self-explanatory web-based applications (minimizing the technical learning curve for students and making it equally accessible to everyone who has access to an internet-connected computer, whether they own one or not). The initial use-case is a unit about a week long in a World History to 1500 survey course designed to be a sampler of historical methodologies. \
The transformation itself will require computers equipped with <oXygen/> XML Editor; it is assumed that this will be accomplished on one or more days when the class has relocated to a computer lab classroom where the computers have <oXygen/> installed and the instructor can walk the students through the process of using it. <oXygen/> is not free software and it does not come standard on Windows or Mac machines.\
Alternately, if all students have laptops, and if none of them has used <oXygen/> before, they could be instructed to download <oXygen/> and sign up for the 30-day free trial license.\
Instructors who are familiar instead with Microsoft Visual Studio Code or eXist-DB should be aware that it should be possible to run this pipeline in those environments. Both of those programs are free. However, the instructor would need to know the program well enough a) to make whatever adaptations to the code may be necessary, b) to walk their students through the process, and c) to troubleshoot bugs that arise. No instructions for using those development environments are provided here. If you create them, please create an Issue on this repo and use that to share them for the benefit of other users.\
Similarly, instructors who would wish to use a different network-analysis program should be aware that it may require their data to be structured differently. This could mean rewriting the XQuery scripts provided here.\
Experiment, use, and have fun. Please report any problems on the Issues board.
